---
title: Cordilleran ice sheet
permalink: /cordilleran-ice-sheet/

gallery:
  - url: "https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/49298982311_4c16206d04_b.jpg"
    image_path: "https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/49298982311_4c16206d04_w.jpg"
    title: "Tuya Lake moraines"
  - url: "https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/49298342548_9683726e9d_b.jpg"
    image_path: "https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/49298342548_9683726e9d_w.jpg"
    title: "Floatplane"
  - url: "https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/49299033172_02356fc2a8_b.jpg"
    image_path: "https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/49299033172_02356fc2a8_w.jpg"
    title: "Meltwater channels"

---

Context
-------

During the last glacial cycle, much of North America has been covered by ice.
During the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), peak of glaciation, three major ice
sheets had collided to form a continuous blanket of ice that spanned from
southern Alaska to Newfoundland, connecting with the Greenland ice sheet in the
Canadian Arctic, and extending as far south as Chicago. The Laurentide ice
sheet, largest of the three, was centred on the Hudson Bay, and fully covered
the Canadian Prairies, Eastern Canada, and the Great Lakes Basin. The Innuitian
ice sheet, much smaller, covered the northernmost Canadian archipelago.
Finally, the Cordilleran ice sheet, intermediate in size, capped the mountain
ranges of the Western Cordillera.

{% include gallery
  caption="Fieldwork in the Cordillera (see my [flickr album](
    https://www.flickr.com/photos/pyjeo/albums/72157714500761251) for more)." %}

Glacier modelling
-----------------

Numerical modelling can help to our understanding of the Cordilleran ice
sheet's glacial history. However, the ubiquitously mountainous
topography of the region renders this task particularly challenging. Because of
the irregular arrangement of valleys and ridges that forms the ice sheet's
floor, ice moved along tortuous and intertwined pathways, sometimes following
the major topographical troughs, and sometimes flowing across them. The
complexity of regional climate adds to the complexity of topography. Strong
differences in seasonality and timing of precipitation exist, for instance,
between the rain-drenched coastal areas, and the dry interior
(<https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-8-1087-2014>).

For my PhD project, my colleagues and I used the Parallel Ice Sheet Model
[PISM][PISM] to simulate Cordilleran glacier dynamics through the last glacial
cycle. Due to the mountainous topography on which the ice sheet formed,
ice-sheet-wide spatial reconstructions of advance and retreat patterns have
been lacking, so that we relied on geological studies of local or regional
relevance to validate our simulations
(<https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-10-639-2016>).

{% include vimeo.html
  showcase="8003284"
  caption="Modelled last glacial cycle ice dynamics in the Cordillera
           (different style or language on demand)." %}

The Cordilleran ice sheet rested directly on a complex patchwork of crustal
blocks progressively accreted by geologically old yet still active subduction
zones, which are responsible for significant geothermal variability in the
region and regional differences in crustal rigidity. The variability in bedrock
properties may have affected the basal meltwater production and deglaciation
rates, responsible for the vast esker systems, deep canyons and proglacial lake
sediments found in the Western Cordillera.

[PISM]: https://pism-docs.org
