---
title: Could we measure stress in glaciers?

---

Most glaciers lead lives of constant stress, so they relax by slowly gliding on
their beds. Measuring stress in solid, however, is practically impossible. What
can be measured is the stress response. While civil engineers inspect buildings
for cracks, glaciologists monitor the gliding, flowing, and crevassing of
glaciers in order to learn about their stress levels. But wait, glacier ice is
not exactly a solid. So could glacier stress be measured after all?

FIXME add photo and one or two figs.

{% include figure.html
   image=""
   target=""
   caption=""
%}

## Freezing piezometers in Greenland

Between summers 2014 and 2017, I was part of a Swiss-Japanese team of
glaciologists that deployed and maintained ice-borehole instruments on Bowdoin
Glacier, a small tidewater glacier in north-western Greenland. These
instruments included multi-sensor units that were lowered into the
hot-water-drilled boreholes and suspended on electric cables. If this was an
Alpine glacier, the instruments would remain in water. But in the Arctic,
glaciers are much colder. Their temperature is below the freezing point, so
that any hole, crevasse, water channel carved in the ice will eventually
refreeze.

This process, however, can take up to a few months. For this reason, the units
contained, among other sensors, piezometers. The piezometers were installed in
order to measure water pressure on each unit, which could then be converted to
a water depth, and finally the location of each unit in the water column. This
would allow is to precisely locate our sensors, even if the electric cable was
stretched, coiled, or if the units moved a couple of metres up and down the
borehole after we left Greenland.

Back to my office in Zurich, I quickly identified this early part of the
record. For the first few weeks, the piezometers remained "connected" by water
so that they measured the same pressure fluctuations, corresponding to the
water level in the borehole, with a constant offset, corresponding to the water
height between units. From these quantities I calculated the precise depth of
each unit, and discarded the rest of the pressure data as garbage. Now that
each unit had become enclosed in ice, I could focusing on other measurements,
such as the ice temperature, and deformation measured by inclinometers.

## An accidental discovery

Two years later, I was preparing a publication on Bowdoin Glacier's temperature
record and struggling with a different part of the processing chain. I was
stuck in my analysis, had been stuck for a couple of days. So one morning,
completely at lost, I decided to deactivate all the data filtering steps I had
implemented so far, so that I could once again take a good look at the raw data
and look for processing bugs I may have introduced along the way.

This day, I did not solve my problem. But I made another discovery.

Becoming frustrated and bored, I began randomly zooming in and out on the
multi-coloured curves. And suddenly, among all the noise, I hit a series of
tiny, but very regular wiggles in the signal. These wiggles were part of the
discarded data. There were recorded by the piezometers, or water-pressure
sensors, long after all water was gone. There were ice-pressure wiggles, a
direct measurement of glacier stress.

The piezometers, of course, had continued to record for the entire length of
the experiment, for there is simply no easy way to turn things off on a remote
glacier in Greenland, with no sunlight, and temperatures dropping into the
forties. These data had been sitting on my computer all along. And up to this
day, I must confess that they are still sitting here, formally unpublished. And
I have tons of excuses for it (such as lack of funding, or that little fact I
prefer cycling to working when I am not paid) but the real issue is, that my
colleagues and I have not yet been able to fully interpret the wiggles.

## A stressful ice mystery

Quickly I identified 12-hour, 24-hour and 14-day periodicities in the signal.
These left no doubt on the nature of the signal, for these periods are the
precise signature of tidal records in the Qaanaaq region where Bowdoin Glacier
is located. Does the glacier feel the tide? Of course we know that tidewater
glacier respond strongly to tides, that is why they are called tidewater
glaciers after all. But our boreholes were drilled two kilometers away from the
calving front. Do tidal back-pressure oscillations from ocean propagated all
the way up here?

This would be fascinating, but as I dived deeper into the analysis, I had to
dismiss this hypothesis. Every 12 hours, Bowdoin Glacier gently pushed on
our water-pressure sensors with an incredible regularity. Every 14 days, when
tides where higher, it pushed harder, and seven days later it pushed softer.
But these tiny stress oscillations are anti-correlated with the tide. When tide
was high, we recorded lower stresses, and when tide was high, the pressure went
down. There seem to be a delay between low tide and peak stress, and this delay
varies slightly from one sensor to the next.

While I hope the Bowdoin data will eventually reveal a story, we might also
never fully understand what happened. Our sensors were calibrated for water
pressure, not ice pressure, and it would be difficult to quantify our
measurements without reproducing everything in a cold room. But as academic
life goes, my contract came to an end and I moved to the next postdoc.

So could we directly measure stress in glaciers? I am not sure. But somehow I
wonder whether there will be a day when we can just plug sensors in a glacier
and directly measure the stress field. When I think of the recent hanging
glacier collapses, or complex ice-ocean interactions that will set the pace of
future sea-level rise, I can only imagine what kind of game changer it could
become in field glaciology.
